# Versmessen _et al._ 2024. WGS-based prokaryotic typing
Repository containing the data from the manuscript **Versmessen _et al._ 2024. Average nucleotide identity and digital DNA-DNA hybridization analysis following PromethION nanopore-based whole genome sequencing allows for accurate prokaryotic typing**.

**ABSTRACT**<br>
<p align="justify"> <b>Introduction.</b> Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is revolutionizing clinical bacteriology. This study optimized and evaluated a PromethION nanopore sequencing protocol for prokaryotic WGS and downstream typing and resistance profiling applications.<br>
<b>Materials and Methods.</b> Forty-eight <i>Escherichia coli</i> clinical isolates with diverse sequence types were subjected to WGS using an optimized PromethION nanopore sequencing protocol. Multi-locus-sequence typing (MLST) was used as reference typing method. The genomic relatedness between WGS was compared by means of Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) and digital DNA-DNA Hybridization (DDH) and cutoffs for discriminative strain resolution were assessed. WGS-based antibiotic resistance prediction was compared with Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) assays as reference.<br>
<b>Results.</b> We present an optimized PromethION nanopore WGS protocol for prokaryotes. The ANI and DDH cutoffs of 99.3% and 94.1%, respectively, correlated well with MLST classifications and had the potential to yield higher discriminative resolution compared to MLST. WGS-based antibiotic resistance prediction demonstrated categorical agreements of ≥93% with MIC assays for amoxicillin, ceftazidime, amikacin, tobramycin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole but performed suboptimal (68.8%-81.3%) for amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, cefepime, aztreonam, and ciprofloxacin. A minimal sequencing coverage of 12x was necessary to preserve essential genomic features and typing accuracy.<br>
<b>Conclusion.</b> Our protocol allows for further integrating PromethION technology in clinical laboratories.  ANI and DDH are accurate and robust typing methods, with potentially a superior resolution. WGS-based antibiotic resistance prediction holds promise for certain antibiotic classes.</p>
